[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What does it mean
to be conscious,
to be aware of and respond
to one's surroundings,
a behavior that implies
the existence of a brain
and a nervous system?
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on Inner Evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Convention holds that the
genome-containing nucleus
represents a cell's
brain, for it
was perceived that
genes turning on and off
would control the cell behavior.
As described previously, genes
are not self-actualizing,
they are simply
blueprints that are
read to reproduce the
proteins and the cell itself.
Consequently, the nucleus is
actually the cell's gonad.
The brain of the cell
is the cell membrane,
for it is this structure that
reads environmental signals
and elicits the biological
responses that control
behavior and genetic activity.
The structure and function
of the cell's membrane
reveals that it is an
information processor,
a carbon-based chip, that
provides the interface
between the mind and the body.
The separation of the mind/body
duality is actually first
attributed to René Descartes.
Now, Descartes was a
philosopher in the early ages
of the era of modern science.
And back in 1637 in his book
on the methods of science,
he wrote this following
phrase, and it is--
"Cogito, ergo sum."
I think, therefore I am.
And what Descartes was
really describing in this
was the fact that knowledge,
up until this time,
was just based on hearsay,
that there was no science
to understand what
was actually going on.
And that René Descartes
suggested that we get rid
of all previous knowledge and
start to build a new knowledge
base based on the
method of science.
His only truth that he could
start with is that he existed.
His mind, I think, existed,
and the body existed.
And in creating
"Cogito, ergo sum,"
what René Descartes was actually
saying is that mind and body
represent separate and
distinct substances.
The mind was a
thinking substance
with no physicality to it.
In contrast, the body
was a physical substance
with no thinking
attributed to it.
So we separated mind
and body very early
in the era of modern science.
And yet, this separation
continued 50 years later
when Isaac Newton wrote the
"Principia," the founding
books of what is today
called classical physics.
And in that physics, what Newton
did was separate mind and body
just like René Descartes did.
And he separated the
mind and the body
based on a simple reality.
According to
physics, the universe
is comprised of two elements--
a physical, material element
and an invisible energy,
or spiritual element.
Well, the reason for
separating mind and body
in Newtonian physics is simple.
The body is physical.
The mind, apparently, is a
non-physical energy element.
But there was a little bit more
to that separation as well.
At the time Newton was
creating classical physics,
civilization was actually
being controlled by the church,
and this separation
allowed science
to exist outside of the
realm of the church.
Well, the whole idea
of mind comes back
into our reality in the
era of quantum physics.
Max Planck, in 1944, wrote, "All
matter originates and exists
only by virtue of a force.
We must assume behind
this force the existence
of a conscious and
intelligent Mind.
This Mind is the
matrix of all matter."
Well, this becomes really
important in understanding
the reality of our world
because the mind now
is an energy that is
recognized by quantum physics,
and this returns mind back
into the story of science,
so we can engage mind
with the physical realm.
This is very interesting because
Albert Einstein followed up
with a very important quote
that we had mentioned earlier.
That quote is, "The field
is the sole governing agency
of the particle."
Why is this relevant right now?
Well, the answer is this.
The mind is an energy field.
The particle is the bodies.
So if I repeat Einstein's
quote, putting mind and body in,
it will read as follows--
"The mind is the sole
governing agency of the body."
And this statement
brings the mind back
into our understanding
of science
and its role in influencing
the character of our lives.
We describe the nature
of biology using
the model of a simple machine.
The machine consists
of a mechanism.
There is a force that
drives these protein gears,
and that was the signals
from the environment.
In our model we
also have a switch
that turns the motor on
and off that actually
would control behavior.
So what I'd like to
describe right now
is the nature of that
switch, the switch that
invites a signal
from the environment
to control the behavior
and genetics of the cell.
So we go back to a very
simple equation about life,
and that equation is this--
protein plus signal
equals behavior.
Well, the proteins
are in the cell,
but the signal comes
from the environment.
For the signal to
cross into the cell,
it has to pass through
the cell membrane,
and that's the skin of the cell.
So to understand how
signals engage biology,
it is important for
us to understand
the nature of the structure
of the cell membrane
and how that structure
will facilitate
an environmental signal
crossing into the cell
and controlling the
behavior of that cell.
Well, the first thing
about a membrane is this.
It was only in the late 1940s
that biologists even recognized
that cells had membranes.
And the reason is this.
The membrane is so thin, it
cannot be seen with a regular
microscope.
The membrane, to be seen, we had
to use an electron microscope,
and that was
developed in the '40s.
At the first time
cells were observed,
along the outer surface of the
cell was a layer, the membrane.
There were three
layers to the membrane
as seen in the electron
microscope-- dark, light, dark.
Now, what's really significant
about this identity
of the membrane is this.
In biology, structure
relates to function.
The more complex the structure,
the more complex the function.
Well, when they looked
at the cell membrane
with a simple
trilaminar layer, they
said, well, there's not
really much structure to that,
and that all of a sudden implied
that perhaps there wasn't very
much function to the membrane.
In fact, scientists
perceived that the membrane
is nothing more
than plastic wrap
containing the
cytoplasm of the cell.
It's just basically
a structure that
holds the cytoplasm together.
Well, that was based on
the electron microscope.
The simple trilaminar
structure of the cell membrane
actually reflects the
molecular organization
that is the foundation
of this membrane.
The membrane is composed
of a bilayer of what
are called phospholipids.
Phospholipids are very
interesting molecules
because half the
molecule is hydrophilic,
meaning it would love to
be dissolved in water,
but the other half of the
molecule is hydrophobic
and avoids water.
The significance of this is that
the molecules forming the cell
membrane create a
layered structure
with lipid in the center.
The membrane is a barrier,
but the lipid in the center
resists water.
It's hydrophobic.
So what that means is, anything
from the outer environment that
is soluble in water cannot
pass through the membrane
because of the lipid center
which will resist the flow
of water molecules
going across the cell.
So the significance is this.
The membrane structure,
by definition,
is a crystalline structure
with a lipid core
that actually makes
it a nonconductor.
Trilaminar structure
I can illustrate
by using an analogy of a
bread and butter sandwich.
Now, the bread on
each side would
represent the phosphate
groups because bread,
like phosphate groups,
can absorb water.
But in the center of the
bread and butter sandwich,
the thick layer of
butter is the equivalent
of the lipids in the
center of that membrane.
Now, the issue
about this is, if we
tried to feed the cell
some food in our model,
so let's take a
spoonful of grape juice
and drop it on the bread
and butter sandwich,
the question is this.
Will that food
enter into the cell?
Well, if you section this
bread and butter sandwich,
guess what you find.
Yes, the phosphate groups
would absorb the food,
but the food would not be able
to penetrate through the lipid
layer in the middle,
and therefore nothing
can get into the cell,
and in fact, nothing
can get out of the cell because
the membrane at this point
is simply a barrier
with a hydrophobic core
in the center of it.
Yet, the membrane is
responsible for allowing food
to come in and waste
products to come out
as well as signals to come in.
I say, well, how can this occur
in a bread and butter sandwich?
And the answer is this.
What was not seen in
the electron microscope
in our picture of the
crystalline structure
of this membrane is the
fact that there are proteins
built into the membrane.
And they're built
into the membrane,
hence, the name
of these proteins
are called integral membrane
proteins, abbreviated as IMPs.
Well, there are
two major classes
of IMPs built into the membrane.
One of these protein classes
is called a receptor.
And I say, what are receptors?
Well, these are
proteins that respond
to environmental signals.
And it's very interesting
because our skin
is analogous to the
membrane of the cell.
And where do you think
our receptors are?
Eyes, ears, nose taste, touch,
pain, temperature, pressure.
Ah.
Like the cell, our receptors are
built into the skin, the cell
membrane.
But when we go back
to the cell membrane,
the receptor is simply a
protein with an antenna,
and the antenna
vibrates and resonates
with signals in the
environment, so a receptor
picks up a signal.
What happens to a protein when
it complements with a signal?
When a signal shows up that the
receptor can read, guess what?
The receptor changes
shape, and now the receptor
can connect to the
second class of proteins,
and this class of proteins
includes channels.
Now, channels, as the
name said, are proteins
that have a conduit through it.
In a resting state,
a channel is closed
so nothing can get
through that channel.
But when the channel is
activated by a signal,
the channel opens up and
allows the conduction
from one side of the channel to
the other side of the channel.
To visualize what this
actually represents,
I have an animation.
It's a piece of membrane
cut out of a cell.
In it, you'll see a receptor
with an antenna and a channel,
and at this point,
the channel is closed.
Now, what will happen is this.
The receptor is scanning the
environment for a signal,
and when the signal
shows up, it's
going to cause the
receptor to change shape.
And when this receptor
changes shape,
it allows a protein,
called a G protein,
to connect between the
receptor and the channel.
When the G protein
connects to the channel,
that's the signal for
the channel to open up.
And when the
channel opens up, it
forwards a signal
from the environment
into the cell, a
physical signal,
that will now control
the behavior of the cell
inside the cytoplasm.
So this is actually a switch.
It's a membrane
switch, a response
to a primary
environmental signal.
Through the
receptor, the channel
creates a secondary signal
which goes into the cell
to control its function.
So the receptor and
channel are devices
to read an environmental
signal, that's the receptor,
and then to send a
signal into the cell
to control the proteins and
the behavior in the cell.
That's the function
of the channel.
Another way of
understanding this
is that the receptor
and the channel
represent an
information processor--
the receptor reading
environmental information;
the channel forwarding a
signal into the cell based
on that information
and then adjusting
the function inside the cell.
Well, we go back to our
bread and butter sandwich.
And now I say, let's put some
channel proteins in there.
Well, they'll resemble
olives put into a sandwich.
I say, now what?
I say, well, let's feed
that sandwich the blue
juice that we fed before.
However, this time
what you can see
is something very different.
When the pimento is
out of the olive,
the channel exists
and the food can now
pass from the outer surface
and go inside the cell.
If the pimento is
still in the olive,
nothing can get through it.
I go, so what is the
difference between a pimento
and not having a pimento?
And it's simply this.
When the channel protein
is not activated,
it is tightly closed.
But when the signal shows
up in the environment,
it causes a protein
to change shape
which opens up the channel.
So an open channel is like
an olive without a pimento,
it lets things in
and across the cell.
So we understand now
that the membrane
is reading environment
and then adjusting
the function of the
inside of the cell.
Well, what does
this also represent?
Well, as an
information processor,
you can also mention the
receptor as being the input
and the channel
being the output.
And what's really important
about this information is,
input/output is also recognized
in information processing
as I/O.
Wow.
What's really
interesting about that
is that I/O represents a bit
of data in a computer chip.
Well, it also represents a bit
of data in a cell membrane.
What it represents is
how a cell responds
to an environmental signal by
sending a signal into the cell
to adjust the function
of the cytoplasm.
Now, if we look at the
surface of the cell, what
you can see all over the
surface are protein receptors,
and there are antennas
on these receptors.
These antennas are
actually sugar groups,
and these sugar groups
vibrate and resonate.
The significance is
that when a signal that
is in harmony with a receptor,
it shows up in the environment,
it is picked up by
the sugar antenna,
and that causes the
protein that the antenna
is attached to to change shape
and then connect to a channel.
If you look at the
surface of the cell,
then what you would
see is the cell
is covered by a myriad
of receptors and antennas
sticking off the surface.
To give you an important
analogy of what this represents,
the receptors on the
surface of the cell membrane
are equal to a
keyboard on a computer.
Each key on a computer
is sending information
into the computer.
Each receptor on the
surface of the cell membrane
is sending a specific piece
of information into the cell
to control its function.
The signals of the
environment are
typing on the
surface of the cell
by activating these
receptors which
are the keys that send
information in the cell that
control the function.
So we now have a basic switch,
and this switch represents
a receptor and a channel.
And the significance of that
is, the receptor is reading
the environmental signal.
The channel is forwarding
that signal inside the cell.
There are actually
about 100,000 switches
on the surface of
any cell reading
a myriad number of
environmental signals
that the cell is experiencing
and allowing the cell
to adapt its
function to whatever
is going on in the environment.
Now, what's the
name of this switch?
A receptor effector integral
membrane protein complex.
Wow, big deal.
However, guess what?
If I define the switch
by its function,
it comes up with a word that
we're all familiar with--
perception.
And guess what?
The definition of perception
in the dictionary--
"Awareness of the
elements of environment
through physical sensation."
I say, so what's the
significance of this?
The switch represents
perception.
Perception is the ability to
respond to the environment.
And so I say, then,
what controls the cell?
Perceptions control the cell.
Change your perception
and you change
the function of the cell.
But then this brings in
a very interesting point.
Are all of our
perceptions accurate?
Well, the answer is no.
We obviously all have what
are called misperceptions.
So I have a different
name for the switch now.
The switch represents
belief because that's
what perceptions are, beliefs.
Oh my goodness, what does
this ultimately come down to?
Belief is controlling
your biology.
Change your belief,
change your perceptions,
and you change the function
and character of your cells.
So now I say, well, how
does this actually work?
What is the real mechanism?
Well, this is a surprise to
me, because back in 1985 I
was trying to write the
definition of the cell membrane
to include what I
just understood.
Yet, at that time, in
1985, conventional science
was of the belief that
genes were controlling
the function of the cell.
So when I showed them
my results of how
I changed the
environment and how
I changed the fate of the
cells, they shrugged it off as,
well, it's not really relevant
because we're all studying
in genes and you're not.
So there I was, in 1985,
writing a new definition
of the cell membrane.
My first part of
the definition is,
well, remember the lipids that
are making up that membrane,
the phospholipids?
Well, they're organized into
a crystalline structure.
Well, it's not a crystal
like quartz or diamonds.
It's a flexible crystal.
And in today's world we
talk about flexible crystals
as being liquid crystals.
So the first part
of my definition
is, the cell membrane
is a liquid crystal.
But remember, without the
proteins in the cell membrane,
nothing could come across
that cell membrane,
so a plain phospholipid membrane
actually was a nonconductor.
However, once you added
the proteins into the cell,
the channels allowed for
conduction from some signals
from the outside to
penetrate into the cell
and control its function.
Well, here comes a
very important point.
Channels are very specific.
There are sodium channels,
potassium channels, calcium
channels, glucose channels.
Well, guess what?
Not all signals can cross
a membrane, only signals
that have a channel
that recognizes them.
So the membrane is no
longer a nonconductor,
but it's not a full
conductor because it
doesn't conduct everything.
It is a semiconductor.
So I add that definition to
my membrane-- a liquid crystal
semiconductor.
But then I have to define the
nature of the proteins that
are built into the membrane
that are controlling
the functions, the proteins
that are the switch.
There are two kinds of proteins
that comprise a switch--
a receptor and a channel.
Well, interestingly, guess what?
There's a synonym for
the word receptor,
and that's called gate.
So I write down, well,
what kind of proteins
are built into
the cell membrane?
Gates and channels.
And then I stand back and I
look at what I just wrote.
And here's the definition
of a cell membrane.
The cell membrane is a
liquid crystal semiconductor
with gates and channels.
All of a sudden I
said, oh my god, I just
read that definition somewhere.
Where did I read that?
Well, I had just bought my
first Macintosh computer,
and I bought a book
from Radio Shack,
understanding your
microprocessor, a simpleton
book in understanding
how computers work.
Well, immediately I
opened up that book
and there it was right in
the introduction to the book.
The definition of
a computer chip
is "a crystal semiconductor
with gates and channels."
Wow, what a coincidence.
The definition of
the cell membrane
is exactly the same definition
as a silicon-based computer
chip.
But then, as I started
to match the structures
to the functions, between
the carbon-based chip called
the cell membrane and the
silicon-based chip that are
in our computers, guess what?
Piece by piece, each part
represented the same function
in both the silicon chip
and the carbon-based chip.
Significance all of a
sudden came to me and said,
oh my god, the membrane
is not like a chip.
The membrane is a chip.
It's an information processor,
a carbon-based chip,
and it was only created
about three billion years
before scientists
created the silicon chip.
And it works in exactly
the same mechanism.
Typing information
into your computer,
it goes through the
chip and then comes out
as data on the screen.
The silicon chip,
that's how it works,
but the carbon-based
chip of the membrane
does something very similar.
The environment send signals to
the cell, types on the surface,
and then the gate
and channel switches
create that function
inside the cell
to match what's going
on in the environment.
And all of a sudden
it's like, oh my god,
we now have an understanding
of the nature of consciousness,
and the fundamental unit of
consciousness is a perception.
A perception is an expression of
a receptor effector or receptor
channel complex.
And the relevance about
that is, well, up to now,
how can you measure
consciousness?
Oh, you can take
tests like IQ tests
and all that, observe
animals and their behavior
and their responses
to the world.
That shows us that animals
can respond to the world
through consciousness, but
it doesn't show how it works.
Now, for the first time,
there's a physical expression
of the mechanism that
converts environmental signals
into consciousness, and these
are the protein switches.
Later in this
program we're going
to talk about evolution and how
these protein switches account
for the current evolution and
for the future of evolution.
At this moment, let's just
review what we just observed.
A cell membrane is
a skin of a cell.
Underneath that
cell membrane are
the contents of the cytoplasm
which include the proteins
as well as the nucleus which
includes the chromosomes
with the genetic information.
Environmental signals
hit specific receptors
on the surface by complementing
the receptor antenna.
The receptor changes its
shape, forwards a signal
inside the cell, and that signal
is passed from one protein
to another protein.
And every time a signal
picks up a protein
and engages the function of
that protein, all the pathways
inside the cell that account
for metabolism, movement,
intelligence of
the nervous system,
all the functions
of the cells, are
due to the environmental
signals engaging
the functions of
cytoplasmic proteins.
So in conclusion,
cells are intelligent.
Actually, they're super
intelligent because think
of this.
Cells created human
beings, and cells
have functions that even
human science can't reproduce.
And since we are made
of cells, an insight
into the structure and function
of the cell's nervous system
would reveal the foundation
of how our own nervous system
manifests consciousness.
While we used to study
genes as the primary insight
to understanding how cells
work, a new field of study
called signal transduction
is now the primary emphasis
of scientific research.
It's the science
that studies how
signals from the
environment engage
the functions of the cell.
So signals from the environment,
through the cell membrane,
through the proteins in the
cytoplasm into the nucleus,
control gene activity.
This is a subdivision of
signal transduction science,
but it has its own special name.
It's called epigenetics.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on Inner Evolution
through biological change.
Join me for the
next episode where
we'll talk about the
seat of consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]